Add documentation on OTEL support (#47194)
vercel/next.js: docs/advanced-features/open-telemetry.md

We will use terms like _Span_, _Trace_ or _Exporter_ throughout this doc, all of which can be found in [the OpenTelemetry Observability Primer](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/).

> **Note:** We currently support observability bindings only in serverless functions.
> We don't provide any for `edge` or client side code.

## Getting Started

Next.js supports OpenTelemetry, which is platform agnostic. You can change your observability provider without changing your code.
Read [Official OpenTelemetry docs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) for more information about OpenTelemetry and how it works.

To get started, you must install the required packages:

```bash
npm install @opentelemetry/api @opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http @opentelemetry/resources @opentelemetry/sdk-trace-base @opentelemetry/semantic-conventions
```

Next, create a custom [`instrumentation.ts`](./instrumentation.md) file in the root of the project.

> Since you can't import OpenTelemetry on `edge` we recommend creating second file, that get's only imported in correct environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since you can't import OpenTelemetry in `register` functions executed on the Edge Runtime, we recommend creating second file that will only be imported if the runtime is `nodejs`.

The following example demonstrates an `instrumenation.ts` file that checks the runtime, then imports the code it needs to run:
```

Reviewer: @jankaifer What do you think of this change?

# OpenTelemetry in Next.js

Observability is crucial for understanding and optimizing the behavior and performance of your Next.js app.

As applications become more complex, it becomes increasingly difficult to identify and diagnose issues that may arise. By leveraging observability tools, such as logging and metrics, developers can gain insights into their application's behavior and identify areas for optimization. With observability, developers can proactively address issues before they become major problems and provide a better user experience. Therefore, it is highly recommended to use observability in your Next.js applications to improve performance, optimize resources, and enhance user experience.

We will use terms like _Span_, _Trace_ or _Exporter_ throughout this doc, all of them can be found in [Observability Primer](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/).

> **Note:** We currently support observability bindings only in serverless functions.
> We don't provide any for `edge` or client side code.

## Getting Started

> Next.js supports OpenTelemetry which is platform agnostic. You can change your observability provider without changing your code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next.js supports OpenTelemetry, which is platform agnostic. You can change your observability provider without changing your code.
```

Read [Official OpenTelemetry docs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) for more information about OpenTelemetry and how it works.

> Firstly you need to install required packages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, you must install the required packages:
```

```bash
npm install @opentelemetry/api @opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http @opentelemetry/resources @opentelemetry/sdk-trace-base @opentelemetry/semantic-conventions
```

> Next you add custom [`instrumentation.ts`](./instrumentation.md) file with OpenTelemetry setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create a custom [`instrumentation.ts`](./instrumentation.md) file.
```

> Since you can't import OpenTelemetry on `edge` we recommend creating second file, that get's only imported in correct environment.

Reviewer: Oh, I understand now. Thanks for the clarification!

import { Resource } from '@opentelemetry/resources'
import { SemanticResourceAttributes } from '@opentelemetry/semantic-conventions'
import {
  NodeTracerProvider,
  SimpleSpanProcessor,
} from '@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node'

// You can use gRPC exporter instead
import { OTLPTraceExporter } from '@opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http'

// Next.js expects you to use to register TraceProvider. It won't work if you use NodeSDK.
// We use registered provider to create traces inside of Next.js internals.
const provider = new NodeTracerProvider({
  resource: new Resource({
    [SemanticResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME]: 'next-app',
  }),
})

provider.addSpanProcessor(new SimpleSpanProcessor(new OTLPTraceExporter({})))

// Make sure to register you provider
provider.register()
```

> **Note**: We have created a basic [with-opentelemetry](https://github.com/vercel/next.js/tree/canary/examples/with-opentelemetry) example that you can use.

## Testing your instrumentation

You need a OpenTelemetry collector with a compatible backend to test OpenTelemetry traces locally.
We recommend using our [OpenTelemetry dev environment](https://github.com/vercel/opentelemetry-collector-dev-setup).

> If everything works well you should be able to see root server span labeled as `GET /requested/pathname`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If everything works well you should be able to see the root server span labeled as `GET /requested/pathname`.
```

All other spans from that particular trace will be nested under it.

By default we emit a few spans, but internally Next.js traces way more.

> If you want to dig deeper into our internals you can set `NEXT_OTEL_VERBOSE=1`.

Author: Yes

## Custom Spans

You can add your own spans as well. And since we are using OpenTelemetry this part is not Next.js specific.
You can use `@opentelemetry/api` and it will automatically work.

```ts
import { trace } from '@opentelemetry/api'

export async function fetchGithubStars() {
  return await trace
    .getTracer('nextjs-example')
    .startActiveSpan('fetchGithubStars', async (span) => {
      try {
        return await getValue()
      } finally {
        span.end()
      }
    })
}
```

More documentation can be found in [OpenTelemetry docs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/js/instrumentation/).

> We will call `register` function before your code runs in a new environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `register` function will execute before your code runs in a new environment.
```

# OpenTelemetry in Next.js

Observability is crucial for understanding and optimizing the behavior and performance of your Next.js app.

As applications become more complex, it becomes increasingly difficult to identify and diagnose issues that may arise. By leveraging observability tools, such as logging and metrics, developers can gain insights into their application's behavior and identify areas for optimization. With observability, developers can proactively address issues before they become major problems and provide a better user experience. Therefore, it is highly recommended to use observability in your Next.js applications to improve performance, optimize resources, and enhance user experience.

We will use terms like _Span_, _Trace_ or _Exporter_ throughout this doc, all of which can be found in [the OpenTelemetry Observability Primer](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/).

> **Note:** We currently support observability bindings only in serverless functions.
> We don't provide any for `edge` or client side code.

## Getting Started

> Next.js supports OpenTelemetry, which is platform agnostic. You can change your observability provider without changing your code.

Reviewer 2: Next.js supports OpenTelemetry instrumentation out of the box, (expand on what that means)

Author: I tried expanding it, but I'm unsure if that is enough. I don't want to turn it into a blogpost :)

Read [Official OpenTelemetry docs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) for more information about OpenTelemetry and how it works.

To get started, you must install the required packages:

```bash
npm install @opentelemetry/api @opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http @opentelemetry/resources @opentelemetry/sdk-trace-base @opentelemetry/semantic-conventions
```

Next, create a custom [`instrumentation.ts`](./instrumentation.md) file in the root of the project.
Since you can't import OpenTelemetry in `register` functions executed on the Edge Runtime, we recommend creating second file that will only be imported if the runtime is `nodejs`.

The following example demonstrates an `instrumenation.ts` file that checks the runtime, then imports the code it needs to run:

```ts
// instrumentation.ts

export function register() {
  // We need to make sure that we import these files only in Node.js environment.
  // OpenTelemetry is **not** supported on Edge or Client side at the moment.
  if (process.env.NEXT_RUNTIME === 'nodejs') {
    require('./instrumentation-node')
  }
}
```

```ts
// instrumentation-node.ts

> import { Resource } from '@opentelemetry/resources'

Reviewer 3: This seems complicated and doesn't feel like it's integrated into the framework. We might want to discuss abstraction options for the getting started case.
